# name_study

7/15/24:

I projected I wanted to do for quite some time based upon various texts. A shoutout to my data science professor that loved the idea too. However, the biggest restraint with this project will be the lack of reliable data for what will likely be very sensitive topic.

Unfortunately I expect progress to be slow and minimal, particularly as I do not anticipate finding much data to really unearth what I'm interested in trying to prove empirically. Even the below source from SS only has their names - not even their years lived. However, it's at least on the topic so perhaps in hope of getting more inspiration/jolt to continue later let us at least do this.

## Introduction

A variety of classic texts call for the significance of a name a person has in their life. Perhaps the most significant source is in Tractate Brachot 7b where Rabbi Elazar is cited to the concept of 'and from where is it known the concept that names affect a person?" per an alternative pronunciation of the word 'shamot' as 'sheimot' (devastations; names) in Pslams 46:9, with the verse now reading 'Go and see the works of the Lord, that He has placed names in the Earth." Examples of names influencing people's actions are quoted there in Brachot with regards to Ruth, Tractate Sotah 34b with regards to the Spies, Midrash Tanchuma Exodus (1:2), and Midrash Rabbah Numbers 16:9 to the spies as well. Of special interest are the later two that explicitly state, "There are people whose names are pleasant yet have disgusting deeds...and (finally) those whose names and deeds are disgusting." There we see all four combinations (in Numbers starting with pleasant names yet bad deeds, referring chiefly to the spies who squandered their great potential by focusing upon the negative aspects of their report to Moses) of people that were at a potential life advantage or disadvantage and either manifested their default or went against it.

The idea is a fundamental idea taken up by Rabbi Judah Loew, the Maharal of Prague. A particularly interesting example includes his composition 'Beir haGoleh' (lit. Well of the Diasporah) 5:9 where he applies this example to Adam (the First) naming the various creatures with whatever name. Instead of merely giving them linguistic handles to pragmatically identify one species from another, he studied their talents and tendencies and fitted them with an appropriate name to go along with such potential.

Classically in my tradition, it's assumed that the parent(s) naming the child are instilled with a special 'divine inspiration' (lit. 'holy wind') when naming it. Often, even if mistakes were made (such as uttering 'Yochanan' in place of 'Yonatan'), they are kept, bolstering this idea as to how influential names are. A story I heard a number of years ago (source) where a man was out of the country when he heard his wife gave birth to a baby boy. He was called to name him and decided on the name Isaac. Upon returning to his country and to his wife, he was quite scared when his wife (seemingly unaware of what her husband had decided) asked him to hold his new daughter. Naturally, he was quite petrified with his (and the informant's) mistake. He asked numerous communal leaders for advice and eventually it was recommended to name his daughter 'Rebecca', preserving the spirit of his original idea (being the biblical wife of Isaac) and accommodating for typical discrepancy between male and female names.

## Problem Statement

To bring all this to the realm of data science: A final source to quote is the beginning of the Book of the Pious (Commandments 51) where he classically calls for people for people not to be named Samuel. Unfortunately that source doesn't say the reason for avoiding that name, presumably it is to avoid channeling a force of pre-mature death, like the original namesake who died at the age of 52.
Albeit the world is not concerned with this and plenty of people are still named Samuel and the like (including my grandfather who died in his late 70s), should they be concerned for this? Is there indeed a palpable and observable difference to their life span? Reckoning back to an idea we already quoted, perhaps subconsciously and prophetically imbued with knowledge the child would perish (Heaven forbid) early it was given a name conducive to that?

On the other side, are certain populations of names leading longer lives? Are people named Chayim and any derivative (such as perhaps Harry or Henry) more likely to live longer. Are Abrahams more likely to be the revolutionaries and the targets of assassinations? Are Josephs more likely to be hated by their siblings, handsome, put into positions of power than average? Are Deborahs more likely to be outgoing and public? Are Hannahs more likely to have difficulty conceiving children?

Likely in many cases the lack of the assumed trend is not a disproof. Ie with the life example: Perhaps the individual children would have lived a shorter than average life without names such as 'Chayim' and had to receive such names to live a typical lifespan. Even if the average 'Chayim' lived a meager 30 years, perhaps it would have been even less with a different name. Furthermore, perhaps the quality of their life was enriched as opposed to the quantity. However, if the population of 'Chayims' lived much longer than the average (male) then that would be a proof to our thesis. Similarly,  perhaps 'Samuels' would have lived even longer if that name wasn’t chosen, yet they received it to live a more 'normal' lifespan.

Besides the infinite targets to gauge (seemingly proven with a simple t-test), the even more infinite features to play with are another thing to explore. Ie how does a Michael live as opposed to Michael the II or III, with or without his namesake in his life? Spelling as well is another source of potential interest.

On a more broad level we could simplify names as being 'mainstream', 'uncommon', 'rare', and 'pardon?' (such as a stereotypical trend of celebrities to name their children names that 'don't belong' to humans) and do similar analysis. However, I am by far more interested in the nuanced affects of one name to the rest of the population.

The biggest hurdle to properly do this project is the lack of accurate data to such sensitive matters. So much so it essentially kills this project. Pragmatically, the easiest one to actually get data for would be to go to the SSMDF (Social Security Master Death File) and somehow try to get millions of people's information and start comparing life spans, marriages, children, and whatever other easily available information. Yet, the limitation of cost is a burden to that approach as well.

To conclude, for now, with a formal statement as to who would be interested in this type of thing: Well, wouldn't any parent that has dreams for their children, particularly kings and other heads of states, want to imbue their kids with the best possible odds at success? Whether or not the name is merely a reflection of the future likelihood or more actively tilting their life trajectory would we not want to have them starting in a position of positivity and success and not negativity and failure?

## Sources

https://catalog.data.gov/dataset/baby-names-from-social-security-card-applications-national-data
